docs: add `handwritten list-resources` section in `magic-modules/develop` tab (#17212)
GoogleCloudPlatform/magic-modules: docs/content/develop/add-listresource.md

> ---

Reviewer: please rename this file to not include `handwritten` too!

weight: 65
---

# Add a list resource

List resources plug into Terraform’s plugin-framework [list-resource API](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/plugin/framework/list-resources) so users can run [`terraform query`](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/cli/commands/query) and use `.tfquery.hcl` files against resources that already exist in Google Cloud. Each list resource is tied to exactly one managed resource type: results expose that type’s [resource identity](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/resources/identities), and optionally full state when `include_resource` is set on the `list` block.

For end-user behavior, file layout, and Terraform version requirements, see the registry guide [Use list resources with terraform query (Google Cloud provider)](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/hashicorp/google/latest/docs/guides/using_list_resources_with_terraform_query).

## Helpers in [`tpgresource/list_resource.go`](https://github.com/GoogleCloudPlatform/magic-modules/blob/main/mmv1/third_party/terraform/tpgresource/list_resource.go)

> Most shared behavior for handwritten list resources lives in `mmv1/third_party/terraform/tpgresource/list_resource.go`. Use it instead of reimplementing wiring:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most shared behavior for handwritten list resources lives in `mmv1/third_party/terraform/tpgresource/list_resource.go`. Use these helpers instead of reimplementing wiring:
```

| `ListConfigField` / `ListConfigKindString` (etc.) | Declares each attribute allowed inside the list block’s `config { ... }` (for example optional `project`). Must match a separate config model struct with `tfsdk` tags for use with `listReq.Config.Get`. |
| `GetProject`, `GetRegion`, `GetZone`, `GetLocation` | Resolve a config field or fall back to the provider default (`types.String` from the model). |
| `SetResult` | After you populate a `*schema.ResourceData` for one listed item, call this to fill `ListResult`: identity state, optional full resource state when `listReq.IncludeResource` is true, and `DisplayName` using `ListResultDisplayName` and the `displayNameKeys` you pass (for example `"display_name", "email"`). |
| `ListResultDisplayName` | Standalone helper if you need a label from `ResourceData` without going through `SetResult`. |

Lower-level helpers in the same file include `SetResourceIdentityAttributes` (identity field writes on `ResourceData`). Identity copying for list rows uses the embedded managed resource’s identity schema via `setResourceIdentity` (see comments on `SetResult`).

## Prerequisites

> 1. A working managed resource implementation (SDK v2 `*schema.Resource`) for the type you want to list, including a correct identity schema for query results.

Reviewer: Most resources won't have an identity schema. Would it make sense to include adding one as part of this process, rather than having it as a prerequisite?

> 1. Familiarity with the Terraform plugin framework `list` package (`list.ListResource`, `list.ListRequest`, `list.ListResultsStream`) and Terraform 1.14+ for acceptance tests that exercise the list API.

Reviewer: If familiarity with the list package is a prerequisite, please add a link to the relevant docs about this package, so that people can know how to get familiar with the package.

Why is familiarity with TF 1.14+ a prerequisite? Do you mean that TF 1.14 is required to run the acceptance tests? If so, would it make sense to say that TF 1.14 needs to be installed rather than that you need to be familiar with it?

	}
	d := ResourceGoogleServiceAccount().Data(&terraform.InstanceState{})
	if project != "" {
		if err := d.Set("project", project); err != nil {
			return fmt.Errorf("error setting project on temporary resource data: %w", err)
		}
	}
	url, err := tpgresource.ReplaceVars(d, config, "{{IAMBasePath}}projects/{{project}}/serviceAccounts")
	if err != nil {
		return err
	}

	billingProject := ""
	if parts := regexp.MustCompile(`projects\/([^\/]+)\/`).FindStringSubmatch(url); parts != nil {
		billingProject = parts[1]
	}
	if bp, err := tpgresource.GetBillingProject(d, config); err == nil {
		billingProject = bp
	}

	userAgent, err := tpgresource.GenerateUserAgentString(d, config.UserAgent)
	if err != nil {
		return err
	}

	return transport_tpg.ListPages(transport_tpg.ListPagesOptions{
		Config:         config,
		TempData:       d,
		ListURL:        url,
		BillingProject: billingProject,
		UserAgent:      userAgent,
		ItemName:       "accounts",
		Flattener:      flattenGoogleServiceAccountListItem,
		Callback:       callback,
	})
}
```

If your API already has a `ListPages`-style helper used by data sources or sweepers, reuse it from `List<Resource>` instead of duplicating HTTP logic.

> ### 3. Register the list resource

Reviewer: This section is now outdated - should now register like so: https://github.com/hashicorp/terraform-provider-google-beta/blob/a2bb29237a63e23dc6d926da51ac8753e7a91e01/google-beta/services/storage/list_google_storage_bucket.go#L41-L45
